# CSC2233 - Project 3 - Implementing a Machine Learning based Cache Management Policy

**Pre-requisites**

- Graduate course in Machine Learning - CSC411 or equivalent.
- Good understanding of Supervised and Unsupervised learning. Familiarity with reinforcement learning algorithms.
- Hands-on experience with numpy, sklearn libraries.
- A good understanding of existing [caching algorithms](http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/vm-beyondphys-policy.pdf).

# Background

Enterprise data centers often use two types of storage devices - fast, small and expensive media like RAM, NVRAM and slower, high-capacity, inexpensive media like HDD and SSD. Data can be stored in both the media, however the goal is to serve maximum amount of requests directly from the fast media, without going to the slower media. Hence data needs to often be fetched from slower media and evicted from the faster media. The faster media is called Cache. A number of algorithms have been proposed to manage cache eviction - i.e. determining what data should be removed from the cache to store new data. This involves predicting next data blocks that would be fetched and which ones can be evicted, given the block features of the current blocks in cache. The ratio of number of block requests served directly from the faster media to the number of blocks served from the slower media is called the hitrate.

# Objective

The goal of this project is to use real-world blocktraces and design cache algorithms based on ML algorithms that outperform standard techniques (LRU, LFU, ARC) to achieve higher hitrate. We will give you a starter code containing the basic implementation of LRU, LFU and OPT algorithm. Feel free to reimplement these algorithms on your own. You will use different block features that are captured in blocktrace to predict which blocks should be evicted from the cache. You can use OPT algorithm to train your ML Model (for supervised learning) for eviction.

# Checkpoint 1 Mid Term Checkpoint (Mid-Feb)
- Familiarise yourself with the starter code and OPT algorithm.
- Implement logistic regression and compare it with LFU and LRU algorithm for 5-10 traces.

- Research different ML techniques and decide which ones you want to consider. You could for example base your work on some of the following methods:
1. Multi-Arm Bandit.
2. Neural Network.
3. Any other reinforcement/online learning algorithm.
Begin implementation and compare with LRU and LFU on 5 [FIU Block Traces](http://sylab-srv.cs.fiu.edu/doku.php?id=projects:iodedup:start)
 trace. 
Provide some baseline numbers:
- Vary the following parameters and report the hit-rate:
1. Effect of cache size.
2. Effect of test/train split.
3. Any other interesting metric.

Your algorithm should perform equal or better than LRU and LFU.

# Checkpoint 2 End Term Checkpoint (End-Of-March)
- Experiment and evaluate your method(s) on a more realistic large trace, which we will provide. Optimize your methods for realistic traces.


# Checkpoint 3 Final Report
1. A pdf format report describing the results.
2. Code - either a .py or a jupyter notebook file with comments.

## References

1. [FIU Block Trace](http://sylab-srv.cs.fiu.edu/doku.php?id=projects:iodedup:start)
3. A preliminary tech-report is available [here](https://github.com/shehbazj/csc2233/tree/master/p3/tech_report.pdf)
4. Starter Code is available [here](https://github.com/shehbazj/csc2233/tree/master/p3/Implementing_A_Machine_Learning_Based_Cache_Management_Policy.ipynb)

## Additional Readings

1. [LeCAR Paper](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/hotstorage18/hotstorage18-paper-vietri.pdf)
2. [ARC Paper](https://www.usenix.org/legacy/event/fast03/tech/full_papers/megiddo/megiddo.pdf)
